# Striking the Right Chord 
## A Biblical Perspective on Instrumental-Free Worship




### The History of the Instrument in Worship


Before delving into the practice of using mechanical instruments in worship services, it would be
valuable to understand the origins of this practice. At the heart of every practice and doctrine
lies a long history of debates amongst theologians, and this topic is no different.

From a historical perspective, the fundamental question to be asked is: "Did the early church
practice this thing?" It's important to note that we will not presuppose the authority of
example; that issue will be examined further in this study.

The simple answer to the question of whether the early church used instrumental music is no. A
straightforward piece of evidence for this historical fact is that acapella translates literally to
"in the style of the chapel." Additionally, examining the historic writings of the "church fathers"
(2nd century Christian writers) reveals that they certainly had no such practice. While
their writings are not inspired, they do give us insight on how they understood the text.

Although the church fathers did not agree on all issues, those who wrote about the use of
instrumental music unanimously condemned it as something that should not be practiced. This
historical perspective provides a foundation for understanding the early church's stance on
instrumental music in worship.

We're lead to the question: "if the first and second century church did not have this practice, when
did it start and what were the reasons?" Toward the end of the 7<sup>th</sup> the Vitalian
introduced the organ into Catholic mass. When Vitalian introduced the organ it was controversial,
and not very well accepted. Despite the initial apprehension towards the organ; its use saw a
gradual increase in acceptance. Interestingly, though the historical use for the instrument can be
traced; there is a scarcity of resources to indicate the reason they chose to incorporate the organ.
On the other hand, there are plenty of historical objections to the adoption of the instrument.

### Historical Objections to Instrumental Worship

Observing modern Christendom might give the impression that the instrument has always been accepted.
Historically, it is utterly clear that the adoption of the instrument in worship was until recently
far from universally accepted. Not only were the church fathers anti-instrument, but also the
fathers of many of our modern christian denominations.

#### Early Christians and the Instrument 

Clement of Alexandria was a former Pagan converted into Christianity. As such, his works dealt
primarily with Paganism. Regarding the stringed instruments in worship, he wrote:

> Let the pipe be resigned to the shepherds, and the flute to the superstitious who are engrossed in
 idolatry. For, in truth, such instruments are to be banished from the temperate banquet, being
 more suitable to beasts than men, and the more irrational portion of mankind.[^1] 
 
He is plainly arguing that from his perspective, instrumental music is for the Pagan, not for
worshippers of YHWH. It is important to note this argument, because it is a common assertion used
by early Christians against the instrument in worship, and we will delve deeper into this argument. In the same chapter, Clement writes:

> In their wars, therefore, the Etruscans use the trumpet, the Arcadians the pipe, the Sicilians the
pectides, the Cretans the lyre, the Lacedæmonians the flute, the Thracians the horn, the Egyptians
the drum, and the Arabians the cymbal. The one instrument of peace, the Word alone by which we
honour God, is what we employ. We no longer employ the ancient psaltery, and trumpet, and timbrel,
and flute, which those expert in war and contemners of the fear of God were wont to make use of also
in the choruses at their festive assemblies; that by such strains they might raise their dejected
minds. But let our genial feeling in drinking be twofold, in accordance with the law [^1] 

Terturllian seemed to understand Ephesian 5:19 as a refutation against the use of instruments: 

> The command, to sing to the Lord with psalms and hymns, [ Ephesians 5:19 ] comes suitably from him
 who knew that those who drank wine with drums and psalteries were blamed by God [^3].

The early Christians did not often deal with this issue as it was not an issue. As noted earlier,
the use of instrument in Christian worship was not an issue until the seventh century. However, when
they do write about the use of instruments; they are clearly against its use. When discussing the
psalms, they would even allegories David's use of the instrument to teach that our instrument is
that of the heart citing Ephesians 5:19. Again, keep this in mind; this booklet will return to this
argument.

#### Denominational Fathers and the Instrument

It is perhaps even more fascinating to note that the fathers of many modern denominations [even the
denominations that currently use instrumental music] were strongly against the instrument in
worship. John Wesley, for example is often quoted saying "I have no objection to instruments of
music in our chapels, provided they are neither heard nor seen." John Calvin weighs in with his
commentary on Psalm 33:2 and says:

> But when they frequent their sacred assemblies, musical instruments in celebrating the praises of
 God would be no more suitable than the burning of incense, the lighting up of lamps, and the
 restoration of the other shadows of the law. The Papists, therefore, have foolishly borrowed this,
 as well as many other things, from the Jews. Men who are fond of outward pomp may delight in that
 noise; but the simplicity which God recommends to us by the apostle is far more pleasing to him.

In fact, as one searches through protestant history, he would be hard-pressed to find any defense of
the instrument until around the 20<sup>th</sup> century. Luther is said to have compared instruments
to the worship of Baal. Spurgeon was also opposed to their use. 
 
 
#### History's Conclusion on the Matter

The main point of this section was not necessarily to showcase counter arguments to the mechanical
instrument. Rather, the purpose is to propose that though the instrument is so widely accepted in
Christendom; it was not always the case. So, the practice of instrument is not one to be presumed,
but it is one that must be defended. This conclusion reached strictly from history will be further
illustrated in the next section which will demonstrate precisely how important worship is to the
Father.

---

### Critical Nature of Worship

#### God's Expectation of Worship from the Law

Paul wrote "whatever things were written before were written for our learning..." (Romans 15:4a)
speaking about the old law. There are many things that one can learn from the old law including:
what sin is, the genealogy of the Messiah, why we needed a Messiah in the first place, and also the
nature of God. 

If God is always the same (Malachi 3:6, James 1:17), one might expect to see God's Throughout the
law and the prophets, **worship was of utmost importance**. In fact, the whole book of Leviticus is
dedicated to the tribe of Levite - the priestly tribe (Deut 21:5). This book which is separated into
27 chapters in the English bible includes very specific laws regarding how they were to worship, how
the priests were to prepare for the rites mentioned [ie sacrifices], as well as examples of worship
that was not pleasing to God. 

Whilst reading through the book of Leviticus, it becomes utterly clear that God demanded very
specific tasks in worship toward Him. For example, Leviticus 3 details how a peace offering was to
be done. He specifically mentions that type - one without blemish (v1), how it is to be slaughtered -
laying hands on the head of the offering at the door of the tabernacle(v2), how it is to be gutted
(v4).

Moreover, it is abundantly clear God's pattern for worship was to be strictly followed, no
exceptions. Notice Leviticus 10, Nadab and Abihu offered "strange or profane fires." The Hebrew word
pronounced 'zer' translated "strange or profane" is usually translated "border," for example:

>  And he overlaid it with pure gold, and made a **molding** of gold all around it. 12 Also he
made a frame of a handbreadth all around it, and made a **molding** of gold for the frame all around it (Exo 36:11-12; NKJV). 

In both verses, "molding" is the same word used in the case of Nadab and Abihu's "strange fire."
This translation suggests that they went outside of what God had commanded them. This is made even
clearer by the Septuagint's translation "allotrios." Thayer comments on the root word "allo" by
saying:

> Synonyms: allos, heteros: allos as compared with heteros denotes numerical in distinction from
 qualitative difference; allos adds (‘one besides’), heteros distinguishes (‘one of two’); every
 heteros is an allos, but not every allos is a heteros; allos generally ‘denotes simply distinction
 of individuals, heteros involves the secondary idea of difference of kind’[^4] 
 
In essence, the word used here suggests that the reason that this offering was "profane" is because
it was an addition to what God had already commanded! Though an understanding of the word serves us
well in the pursuit of understanding what God requires in worship; we do not have to venture any
further than what is said in the English translation. Notice, He clarifies **why** this offering was
not pleasing to God, and it was because this was one "...which He had not commanded them."
(Leviticus 10:1). 

So far, this booklet has established the fact that God demands His worshippers to worship according
to what He has told them. In other words; He does not want more or less from His worshippers than
that which He has commanded. However, a discussion on God's desires in worship would be incomplete
the heart of the worshipper is not discussed. 

Arguably, the most important thing to God in respect to worship is the heart of the worship. A study
of Israel's history reveals that they had one of two issues; namely with God's commands or with the
heart. The latter, manifests by their treating God's law as checklist completely oblivious to the
privilege they had in worshipping Him - the Creator of all things and the One who delivered them from
Egypt and gave them the promised land. Isaiah notes this exact attitude from Israel in his opening
chapter. 

Notice what God says: "The ox knows its owner And the donkey its master’s crib; But Israel does not
know, My people do not consider" (Isaiah 1:3). In the following passage, Isaiah further elaborates
on the sins of Israel, but notice specifically Isaiah 1:11-13:

> To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices to Me?” Says the LORD.  “I have had enough of
burnt offerings of rams And the fat of fed cattle.  I do not delight in the blood of bulls, Or of
lambs or goats.  12	“When you come to appear before Me, Who has required this from your hand, To
trample My courts?  13 	Bring no more futile sacrifices; Incense is an abomination to Me.  The New
Moons, the Sabbaths, and the calling of assemblies— I cannot endure iniquity and the sacred meeting.


Isaiah is very clear when he says: "Therefore the Lord said: 'Inasmuch as these people draw near with
their mouths And honor Me with their lips, But have removed their hearts far from Me, And their fear
toward Me is taught by the commandment of men,'" (Isaiah 29:13; NKJV).

Studying God's expectation for His worshippers, particularly the Jewish worshippers, is indeed
intriguing. The law sat clear boundaries to which the Hebrew had no right to add anything, nor take
anything away (Deut 4:2). Moreover, God desires His worshippers to have the right heart whilst
performing the correct actions. The assertion that this booklet will make is that God's desire for
His worshippers has not changed with the transition into the law of Christ.

#### God's Expectation of Christian Worship in General Terms.

The claim is often made that the God of the Old Testament is different from the God of the New
Testaments.  The fear that we should have is that idea seems to have permeated the minds of the
church.  We will not necessarily touch on the synonymous nature of God in the Old and New Testament,
other than to state that God has the exact same general attitude toward worship. Along these lines,
it also seems beneficial to note that worship denotes the idea of bowing down. In fact, according to
Strong's Dictionary it probably also carries the idea of kissing as in a dog kissing its master's
foot[^5].

In the quest to understanding what is acceptable to God, notice first the comments Jesus made toward
the Pharisees; during the *sermon on the mount*. Particularly, Jesus rebukes at least them for at
least three of their practices. Namely; their alms-giving (Matthew 6:1-4), praying (Matthew 6:5-7), and
fasting (Matthew 6:16-18). Each of these practices are admirable ways by which a person can show
their devotion and "bow down" before God in humility. Nevertheless, their devotion was not accepted
by God because of their hearts were far from Him; they were looking for the instant gratification
of man's praise (John 12:43). In fact, Jesus applies a passage mentioned earlier to them:

>    He answered and said to them, “Why do you also transgress the commandment of God because of your tradition? 4 For God commanded, saying, “Honor your father and your mother’; and, ‘He who curses father or mother, let him be put to death.’ 5 But you say, “Whoever says to his father or mother, ‘Whatever profit you might have received from me is a gift to God”— 6 then he need not honor his father or mother.’ Thus you have made the commandment of God of no effect by your tradition. 7 Hypocrites! Well did Isaiah prophesy about you, saying:
8 	“These people draw near to Me with their mouth,
	And honor Me with their lips,
	But their heart is far from Me.
9 	And in vain they worship Me,
	Teaching as doctrines the commandments of men’ ” (Matthew 15:3-9; NKJV).
	
Primarily, the problem that the Pharisees had was with their hearts. They had the wrong attitude
towards worship to God. Another time, Jesus rebuked them because though they were tithing a tenth of
everything they owned; including the most insignificant spices in their spice cabinets, their hearts
were still wrong (Matthew 23:23). Paul encapsulates this beautifully when he wrote: "And though I bestow
all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, but have not love, it profits
me nothing" (1 Corinthians 13:3; NKJV). 

Another great example of God's attitude towards our worship can be read in John 4. Notice the
question which this Samaritan woman asked: "Our fathers worshiped on this mountain, and
you Jews say that in Jerusalem is the place where one ought to worship” (John 4:20; NKJV). Jesus
responded to the question by noting that (as a Samaritan) she does not even know WHO she worships
(John 4:22).  The Samaritans held to the Pentateuch, which meant they did worship YHWH, but they
also worshipped pagan gods. Further, Jesus plainly states what God expects from those who worship
Him:

> But the hour is coming, and now is, when the true worshipers will worship the Father in spirit and truth; for the Father is seeking such to worship Him. 24 God is Spirit, and those who worship Him must worship in spirit and truth” (John 4:23-24).  

Essentially, this is exactly what God has always desired from His worshippers. This section of the
booklet was meant to bring attention to this very fact. The reader might notices while searching
through the Law, there were times that the Jews worshipped according to spirit - with their hearts,
but not according to truth - God's word and vice versa. The same can be said when looking at the
Pharisees against the Samaritan woman. There is no indication of a heart issue with the Samaritan of
John 4; the contrary can easily be argued, but she and the other Samaritans struggled with the
truth. Whereas, the Pharisees had the truth, with the wrong attitude. It is important to note that
the depth of devotion seen by Pharisees was in essence, selfish. What they did, they did for the
praise of man; which felt good for them.

### The Instrument and the Church

This booklet will not address every defense of or argument for the use of the instrument in worship.
Rather, it seems much more beneficial to dig into what God says He desires in Christian worship. So,
this final section will apply what the previous sections have established to determine what God
desires from His worshippers today. 

#### Instruments and Biblical Worship Compatibility

As it was noted in the previous section, God has clear expectations for His worshippers. Jesus'
assertion that true worshippers worship in spirit and truth is not something that was only
applicable to the law of Christ, but also His worshippers during the time of Moses' law. The wise
student of God's word would look toward the principles which God has declared regarding worship. 

It is important to note God's explicit commands to sing. Paul wrote about this topic on two
occasions:

> Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another in
psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord (Col 3:15)

> speaking to one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord, (Eph 5:19)

Consider how use of the instrument compares to Nadab and Abihu's sin. Notice in both of these
passage, singing is the commandment. Paul even answers the "how" we are to sing when he says "with
grace or melody in your hearts." It is without a doubt, by definition, an addition to the formula
that God has ascribed, when the instrument is added. Nadab and Abihu's worship was not pleasing to
God because what they offered was not commanded of by God; it was profane - outside of God's law.
Similarly, the instrument is outside of God's commands - profane.

With this acknowledgement, there are other issues with which the student of the Bible must deal. For
example, if it is sinful to use instruments because they add to what God has commanded, would that
also require that microphones, pitch pipes, etc. be excluded from Christian worship? First, it is
important to notice that if this were true; the logical conclusion would be to get rid of the
microphone, not to bring in the instrument! However,  It is this writer's contention that these are
expediencies that do not add to what God has commanded in the same way that the instrument does. Notice
when one uses the instrument while singing, there are two verbs; two things that they are doing.
They are singing and they are playing. When one is singing into the microphone, however, they are
only singing! 

Further, it might be argued that the use of instrument is indicative of the wrong attitude or
"spirit" in worship. Jesus often rebuked the Pharisees for their attitude towards devotion to God.
Their motivation was to be seen of man (Matthew 23:5), but on a deeper level; it was out of
selfishness. In other words, they were practicing these things to be seen of men, which made them
feel better. In their hearts; devotion towards God was about pleasing their own desires to be seen
by men. It is not trivial to ask "why use an instrument in the first place?" If the answer to that
question has anything to do with how one feels, there might be a need to check his priorities. The
question that must be answered is: "do I worship for me or for God?"

While strictly observing God's attitude towards man's worship, it is evident that God is not pleased
with instrumental music in worship. The addition of the instrument is very comparable to Nadab and
Abihu's use of the "profane" fire "which God did not command" (Leviticus 10:1) in that it is a clear
addition to God's worship. For the sake of further elaboration it is important to understand the
purpose of Paul's writing what he did in Ephesians 5:19 and Colossians 3:16 in the context of the
early church.

#### The Early Church and Instruments

It is important to not completely disregard one important historical observation, and that is the
fact that the early church did not use instrument! This fact carries even more weight when one
considers the fact that prior to becoming a Christian, they would have certainly have no problem
with instrumental music. If they were Jewish, they would have used instruments as David did and if
they came from paganism, they would have certainly used instruments in their banquets in worship to
their gods. 

The question is: "why would they not use the instrument?" There are some who have speculated reasons
that they might have stopped. The contention that will be presented here is they stopped using thing
instrument in worship is a result of spending time in the apostles' doctrine (Acts 2:42). Instead of
speculating one way or another, what if it could be proven that they understood the apostles to be
preaching against such practices?

Notice the context of Ephesians 5:19. The chapter begins with a very clear contrast between how the
Christianity and paganism:

> But fornication and all uncleanness or covetousness, let it not even be named among you, as is
 fitting for saints; 4 neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor coarse jesting, which are not
 fitting, but rather giving of thanks. 5 For this you know, that no fornicator, unclean person, nor
 covetous man, who is an idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and God. 6 Let no
 one deceive you with empty words, for because of these things the wrath of God comes upon the sons
 of disobedience. 7 Therefore do not be partakers with them (Ephesians 5:3-7).
 
 All of the things listed here are things which the pagans practiced, and Paul is telling the church
 - many of whom converted from paganism - to not be involved with these practices anymore.  Further,
 one could deduce from historical knowledge and the rest of Ephesians that paganism was a huge issue
 in Ephesus. There is a rich history between the city of Ephesus and the goddess Artemis (Diana
 according to the Romans) As the chapter progresses; Paul makes it clear that they used to practice
 these things when he says "For you were once darkness, but now you are in the light of the
 lord" (v8). Further, Paul tells them to not walk as "fools, but as wise" (v15). With the context in
 mind; it is not a stretch to say Paul is implying that the practices of the pagans were foolish. 
 
 This is the context of the passage in question; namely Ephesians 5:18, 19. If the rest of the
 context is a refutation against paganism, this should be as well. One other thing to notice is
 that these to verses are one connected thought, not two separate ideas. The former pagans to whom
 Paul was writing would have understood why this was a singular thought. The pagans had
 several practices that in some ways paralleled Christian worship. For example, Paul taught that one could not
 partake of the Lord's Supper while at the same time joining the pagan feasts (1 Cor 10:14-22).
 Similarly, in the text at hand, Paul is contrasting Christian worship with pagan worship. The
 pagan's worship consisted of drunken feasts and hymns to their gods sang with the lute and harp.
 
 One further fact that the Bible student should consider is the what it means to have "melody in
 your heart." Interestingly enough, that word melody carries the idea of plucking as one plucks the
 strings of a harp, for example[^6]. Some have argued in the past that one could not "psallo"
 without an instrument, but this interpretation hardly fits into the context of Paul's writing here.

When looking at this passage in its intended context; as contrasting Christian practices with pagan
practices, notice how it reads. Paul's message to them is instead of being a part of drunken
banquets like the pagans, be full of the holy spirit; and in contrast with the practice of plucking
the lute or harp, the Christian ought to pluck his heart strings when he sings psalms, hymns, and
spiritual song to God. With the full context, it is clear that Paul is actually specifically
addressing the practice of the use of musical instruments in worship. 

This interpretation of Paul's intentions is supported by what was discussed in the first section
with the second century Christians. The early Christians, some of whom were also converts from
paganism, understood this to be a contrast between pagan worship and Christian worship. Thus, the
reason for their not using the instrument is evident through internal reading as well as external
historical writings. The reason they did not practice the use of instrumental music in the first
century was simply because they were following the doctrine of the apostles!

#### Instrument Use and Christian Liberties

To dispel the temptation to conflate Christian liberties with the use of instrument, this booklet
will preemptively examine some false comparisons that will almost certainly be made. Paul discusses
matters of Christian liberty recorded for the bible student in Romans 14 and 1 Corinthians 10.
Specifically, he discusses the practice of eating meat from the market place that might have been a
result of sacrifice to pagan gods. Indeed in both passages Paul is clear that the idol is nothing
and as such, it is not inherently sinful to eat meat that has been offered to idols; but rather
consider the impact that action will have on other. He says:

> "All things are lawful for me, but not all things are helpful; all things are lawful for me, but not all things edify. 24 Let no one seek his own, but each one the other’s well-being" (1 Cor 10:23-24).
 
So the contention would be that the issue of instrumental music would be an issue of Christian
liberties/scruples.

It is important to note, when Paul "okays" the eating of meat offered to idols, he does not justify
worship of these pagan gods; on the contrary. As it this booklet has already noted, Paul clearly
rebukes partaking in their practices in the same context (1 Corinthians 10:14-17). The fact is that
Paul was not dealing with a matter of worship at all, rather cultural implications of an action;
namely eating meat that has been offered to idols. Moreover, this idea falls flat when considering
that Paul is dealing with instruments in worship.


# Works Cited
 
[^1]: Alexander of Clement; Instructor 2.8 

[^2]: Terturllian Against;  Marcion 5.18

[^3]: John Calvin, Calvin’s Commentaries (Complete), trans. John King; Accordance electronic ed. (Edinburgh: Calvin Translation Society, 1847), paragraph 13694.)

[^4]: “Thayer’s Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament,” Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, paragraph 2.

[^5]: The full definition is: "from 4314 and a probable derivative of 2965 (meaning to kiss, like a dog
licking his master’s hand); to fawn or crouch to, i.e. (literally or figuratively) prostrate oneself
in homage (do reverence to, adore): — worship." Strong's Greek Dictionary of the New Testament.

[^6]: ψάλλω psallo, psal´-lo; probably strengthened from ψάω psao (to rub or touch the surface; compare 5597); to twitch or twang, i.e. to play on a stringed instrument (celebrate the divine worship with music and accompanying odes). Strong's Greek Dictionary of the New Testament 
